mucilage and then we put it in a tank dry we don't add any water and then we like a honey and
it goes straight to the tank it never sees a drop of water and it is still a wet process
because wet has nothing to do with water it's just exposing the wetness of the pulp
then you think okay i can use this machine and i can remove the mucilage mechanically
Now I don't have to rely on the natural process or the wash process.
So it's like where does this fit in into these like decision-making steps?
So if we remove the pulp, it's still a wet process and it's washed and because it is so
efficient, because a eco pulper is so efficient at removing the mucilage,
it has the name of fully washed.
So we had this conversation in the Spanish group
where it was really confusing because most people think of a lavado,
a washed coffee as a fermented coffee.
So when you see fully washed, like completely washed, like extra washed,
you think, oh, extra fermented.
It's more of that other thing when it's actually the opposite.
It's not at all that other thing.
Fully washed, flavor wise, has nothing to do with a washed coffee
because you didn't actually have that fermentation step. You skipped it.
So even in our nomenclature, we were sloppy from the beginning. We were just very,
very sloppy the whole time. And now we're trying to like build on top of this really sloppy
foundation of people not knowing what things are. So it's difficult. Our challenge is big.
And then we enter honey, right? So first we have the machine,
And now we have this other kind of intermediate step where we're like,
what are we going to do with this coffee?
How are you going to process this coffee?
So we have our washed, we have our natural, and then this in between step
where we pulp it, but we pulp it with, we pulp it,
but we don't put it in a tank and ferment it.
So this intermediate step
goes here. It's a pulped natural.
It's kind of like that one because we pulp it, but it's a natural.
But from the other way, it's kind of like that one.
It's a semi-washed.
It's kind of washed.
It's kind of natural.
So this one process has three names.
A pulp natural and a semi-washed and a honey are all the same coffee.
You just have to decide which way you're looking at it from.
It's like a lot of times people think these are three different coffees.
Same.
So those are the ones that get really confusing. The semi-washed pulp natural honey and the fully
washed which is not a washed. And I think about coffee processing is like these like decision
making points. So the first point is am I going to pulp it? Am I going to move forward with the
skin or not the skin? And you say yes or no. And then let's say, so no is natural.
That's really mostly what you can do. If you're going to remove the skin, if
you're going to pulp it, then are you going to go no tank and make it a honey?
Are you going to go into your tank? And then kind of your next decision-making
point is, okay, if you go into a tank, are you going to submerge your fermentation
or are you going to have it be dry? Meaning you're not going to add any
water. And then your next decision-making point is after that are you going to
wash it? Because you can still go through the tank, have a submerged fermentation,
and then just like strain the coffee, like pasta, put it on a bed, and it's
acting like a honey because you didn't wash off the mucilage. It's not drying
all of its mucilage gone. It's not drying naked. So these are all of the ways that
you can combine these steps.
So a lot of producers say, well, what should I call this?
So the easiest thing that you could call something
is wet process or dry.
That's all you need to put on the label.
It's a wet process.
And then you can say, okay,
if you want to add more description,
you can say it's a wet process washed,
or it is a submerged fermentation
with a honey drying process.
or you can kind of like go sort of round and round in this.
So the goal is to know where these words come from
so that you can either kind of like detect a label
and figure out what you like about it.
'Cause maybe what you like about it
actually has nothing to do with the process.
Maybe you just like that varietal
and the process had like a negligible influence
or you really like some kind of process
and almost any variety will behave a similar way
if it's a really, really strong process.
This was just the point about the decision making.
So for producers to say, OK, I made this decision.
I'm going to go one way or the other.
And now I'm here.
And am I going to go one way or the other?
And this is in your books as well.
So this is-- I like to bring this in for context as well.
the textbook for most producers, what people have been working on, working off of since 1963, is
this idea that it has been well established that coffee does not improve as processing time
increases. So the message that has been hammered into most traditional producers heads is do not
ferment your coffee, don't have these defects, over fermentation, you can't add anything, all you can
do is ruin it. Which again is like a really, I don't know, like it's a really negative
message to tell producers. All you can, all your power is to ruin your coffee. So just
get out of the way, disappear, be invisible, and just give it to us as quickly as possible.
Let us have those green seeds as quickly as possible. So it's been my experience that
it's really hard to break this with a lot of producers. Like when we're talking about
fermentation, when we're talking about extended contact, when we're talking about these processes,
still really approaching it from this point of fear of I'm gonna have a
problem, I'm gonna have D-index, I'm going to over ferment and this is you know
where it comes from you've always been told you know this is black and this is
white and now specialty coffee wants to flip it and say okay now up is down and
down is up and a lot of I don't think we're really respecting how much
producers like need a minute to like slow down and turn around like a lot of
of pressure is coming from buyers to make these different coffees that
producers have never made before. It's not like they have this like deep
pocket of knowledge to know how to do this and we just like need to ask them
for it. Like there's this huge disconnect between what producers know how to do,
what they've been told to do, and what most you know consumers want to taste in
their cup. So yeah. Oh you guys can interrupt me at any time. You can ask a
question at any time.
I was thinking about the cherry.
And also--
Oh, you know the diagram?
Yeah.
Because I mean, I think in Thailand,
it's quite common that you have a cherry,
and then you put it in fermentation in a tank.
And it can be the natural.
So I mean, that's why you don't include that.
So if you have your cherry, and then instead of going to dry,
you put it you put the cherry in a tank. And then so for me that would still be a
natural because it's still it still has its skin it's still a cherry. So then I
would say the next question is how are you drying it? Then do you pulp it
and then dry it or do you still dry it in its cherry?
So for me even if it goes through a tank even if you take that cherry you
submerge it, you put it in the tank, take out the cherry, and then you put it out
to dry, it's still a natural because it's had its skin in contact with the seed
the whole time. So you can get really cute and you can say it's a hydronatural
because you submerge it in water. You could, I don't know, you could like add descriptors to that,
but at the end of it it still had its contact. Technically it's still a natural
even if it was in a wet fermentation tank and you added yeast to that cherry and you added fruit to
that cherry, which is difficult because when someone traditionally sees natural on the label
they would expect something else. So there is this like disconnect of like what people are expecting
as a flavor and then what producers are writing down or what they're being told to write down.
So yeah, I don't have an answer.
So just a day, right?
What do you mean?
That's what I have seen in Thailand.
They do this way a lot.
Yeah, I think that's very valid.
It will depend on temperature.
It's not my preferred method, and we'll go into why.
I don't love that method.
But if it works, it works.
Like I mentioned earlier, if it's not broken, don't fix it.
That's my philosophy.
philosophy. The other thing I will mention that we talked about in the Spanish session
is that I, because these are so confusing, right, these names are really, really confusing
of is it a natural or a hydro-natural and what do I mean by that? Sometimes I think
it is valid for a producer to just skip this part altogether and then name it whatever,
name it galaxy process. And you know what you mean by that and someone can ask you a
question and I don't know that you necessarily owe everybody your recipe
that you spent time developing. I don't necessarily think that producers need
to disclose all of this information. I think you can and it helps with
relationships but I just think we like take that for granted that like as a
buyer you owe me your 10-step process and I want a whole paragraph about how
you made that.
So you think you need to keep the skin intact?
So the date is complicated or, in your opinion?
So the question is if you keep the cherry intact and you ferment it?
Compared to pulping?
Compared to pulping, then what is the impact?
Yeah, I mean, you know what I mean? I think for the producer to keep all the skin intact,
maybe the thing that you can keep, the chuta or anything, maybe the filament inside the skin,
yeah, and maybe a better flavor, because it is not lost in the water or something like that.
So something to think about, so that's a really good point that you, it's tempting to think that if we keep the cherry intact,
then we're conserving flavor. We're like preserving all of that goodness in it
and we're not losing it in the tank or it's not being diluted and that is very
tempting but I will say that the microbes that we want to do the
fermentation are on the outside. The mucilage and like the fuel is on the
inside so by keeping the cherry intact you are preventing that mixing, you're
preventing that reaction. So yes keeping it in cherries a really good way to
to preserve your cherry, your coffee,
but preserving really means not influencing.
I put food in the refrigerator to preserve it
so that it doesn't change, so that nothing happens,
or very little happens.
So by keeping your coffee and cherry,
you're preserving it and having very little influence
on the seed, on what's happening.
So for me, what's your goal?
Is your goal to have some maximum impact
on your seed, then cherry for me is not the way to go,
'cause you're preserving
and you're keeping these two things separate.
And the problem is it's the prettier,
like it's the most photogenic version.
So it looks more,
it's more interesting to look at,
but it's the least effective.
And that's why a lot of these cherry methods
are 10 days long.
They're so long because you're not doing anything,
so you need 10 days to make like a little bit of an impact
versus a pulled coffee, we can do it in 24 hours.
So again, it's like, do you have more time?
Do you have more space?
Maybe that's interesting.
So this is the point of view, which
is what we were just talking about, that if we are in cherry,
our coffee is protected.
So our risk is low.
If we have green coffee, it's stable.
It's dry.
12% 11% our risk is low. When we are pulled it's when we are the most
vulnerable it's when it's the most risky and that's why the traditional advice is
get from here to here as fast as possible. Get from cherry to green as
quickly as you can because this is a problem.
Wet hold was not for maximum flavor it was a reality of the transportation and
and a reality of like this is what we can do.
So...
Too hard to dry.
In places where it's too hard to get the coffee dry,
I think too.
We're all in the same place.
Yeah, but it's also risky, right?
Oh yeah.
Yes.
It is risky because you have...
you don't have that complete dryness.
So that moisture allows reactions.
So yes, wet hold is not recommended if you can avoid it.